# Our Team

The project team includes an advisory board that brings together members of the Cherokee Nation, archivists, and linguists with deep knowledge of indigenous languages; it also includes a team of language experts and a team of translators from the Cherokee Nation.

## Biographies

**Roy Boney, Jr.** is the Manager of the Cherokee Language Program and has been working for the past fifteen years on Cherokee language revitalization, with particular emphasis on language technology and the integration of Cherokee language and writing system into current technology platforms. As a member of the DAILP Advisory Board, he advises on how best to integrate DAILP tools and training into existing language learning programs, and how to design DAILP systems and outreach so that they correspond to the genuine needs and opportunities in the community.

**Jeffrey Bourns** is the Semantic Data Specialist in the Digital Scholarship Group (DSG) at Northeastern University. Jeffrey received his doctorate in Linguistics from Harvard University in 2001, supplemented by linguistic training as a Fulbright Scholar at the Universität-Jena, Germany, in 1995-1996. His further credentials include an MSLIS, certification in Linked Data and Semantic Web practices, and training in Linguistic Linked Open Data (LLOD) tools and services. Jeffrey provides research and support for the development of Linked Data and Semantic Web infrastructure and its implementation in digital resources and projects at Northeastern. For the DAILP project, his combination of linguistic and linked open data expertise will be crucial to his work overseeing Cherokee language data management, developing linguistic tools and ontologies, modeling and publication of project language data as Linguistic Linked Open Data, and coordinating roles and activities among linguistic contributors to the project.

**Brian Carpenter** is the Curator of Native American Materials at the American Philosophical Society, where he has worked with over 50 Native communities throughout North America to engage their participation in developing the APS’s policies and practices for the handling of indigenous materials. He holds an MLIS from Drexel University with a specialization in Archives. As a member of the DAILP Advisory Board, his expertise in working with indigenous materials and in building relationships of reciprocity with Native nations will be a crucial source of guidance for the project.

**David Cliff** is the Senior Digital Library Developer in the Library Technology Services group within the Northeastern University Library. He holds a Bachelor of Multimedia-Software Development degree from the Swinburne University of Technology in Australia and has extensive experience as a software developer in academic settings at Melbourne University, Indiana University, and Northeastern University. He has been the lead architect and developer for the Northeastern University Library’s Digital Repository Service (DRS\*\*, a complex Fedora/Samvera implementation, and for the growing framework of digital humanities research and publishing tools being built upon that platform. His deep expertise in all levels of data-driven web application development and architectures will be of particular value to this project as we expand the Charon system to accommodate the complexities of Linguistic Linked Open Data, community-driven workflows, and language learning and translation interfaces.

**Lisa Conathan** is the Head of Special Collections at the Williams College Library. She holds a Ph.D. in Linguistics from the University of California, Berkeley, and an MLS from the University of Maryland with a specialization in Archives. Formerly an archivist at Yale’s Beinecke Library, she organized and described the Beinecke’s Kilpatrick Collection and was the initiator of Yale’s transcription site, Transcribe@Yale, which currently supports the transcription of Cherokee and Mi’kmaq manuscripts. She has worked with Arapaho and Cherokee speakers and their communities and has been instrumental in facilitating collaboration with tribal leaders to identify sacred and medical texts from among archival holdings. She also has worked on the Yurok Language Project, many of whose features will serve as a model for DAILP. As a member of the DAILP Advisory Board, her joint expertise in linguistics and archives will be crucial in bridging those two key aspects of the project’s design.

**Ellen Cushman** is the Associate Dean of Academic Affairs, Diversity and Inclusion in the College of Social Sciences and Humanities at Northeastern University, Dean’s Professor of Civic Sustainability, and a citizen of the Cherokee Nation. She holds a Ph.D. in Rhetoric and Communication from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Her research and publications focus on literacy studies, decolonizing approaches to digital archive development, and language perseverance. As co-Principal Investigator on the DAILP project, her deep connections with the Cherokee Nation and her first-hand understanding of both the language learning process and the social and cultural conditions in which language teaching and learning drive the project and ensure that the DAILP framework is shaped and animated at its core by the needs of the Cherokee nations. She advocates for the core issues and activities of this project; since 2012, she has published 9 peer-reviewed articles and book chapters with five more under contract on topics related to digital archive creation and Cherokee language perseverance, and in the past three years she has presented this research at the University of Colorado, Boulder, Florida State University, Wake Forest University, and Trinity College (twice), Dartmouth University (twice\*\*, and Boston University. A former member of the Cherokee Nation Sequoyah Commission, she has worked with the Cherokee Nation’s CoPartners Johnson- O’Malley Program developing educational resources.

**Aparna Dutta** is a linguist on the DAILP team, working primarily with the transcription, translation, and annotation of original Cherokee manuscripts into an online format. She joined the DAILP team in the spring of 2020 and continues to focus on working directly with language data. Aparna is a recent graduate from Northeastern University with a Bachelor’s degree in Linguistics, and minors in Computer Science and Psychology. She is currently a Master’s student in Computational Linguistics at Brandeis University. Aparna is interested in natural language processing with low-resource languages, and the applications of computational linguistics on endangered language documentation and revitalization. Aparna looks forward to continuing her work with Cherokee and integrating it into her future computational work.

**Julia Flanders** is the Director of the Digital Scholarship Group (DSG\*\* in the Northeastern University Library and a Professor of Practice in the Department of English. She holds a PhD in English from Brown University and has served in a variety of leadership roles in digital humanities. She has over two decades of research, publication, teaching, and management experience with TEI markup, scholarly data modeling, digital research and publishing frameworks, and digital tools for humanities research and education. As Director of the Women Writers Project, DSG, and TAPAS she has extensive experience with design, development, and long-term sustainability for large-scale digital projects, and her recent work as co-Principal Investigator for the Design for Diversity initiative has also given her a deep understanding of the imperatives and challenges of working towards decolonial approaches to digital archives and community-led development processes. As co-Principal Investigator for this project, her expertise in large-scale project management and her familiarity with modeling complex textual data prove invaluable to the design of the TEI, RDF, and IIIF data representation of the transcription and translation data. She also has extensive experience developing workshops and outreach focused on non-technical audiences, which will inform her role in mediating the design and testing events.

**Greg McClellan** is the Digital Scholarship Programmer/Analyst in the Library Technology Services group within the Northeastern University Library. He holds an MS in Information Science and has extensive experience as a systems librarian and developer at institutions including Brandeis, MIT, and Cornell, as well as with open-source software development projects. With his deep expertise in systems integration, he will be responsible for integrating IIIF with the core system components of DAILP including the OLD and CERES, to support the development of transcription, translation, and language learning features.

**Patrick Murray-John** is the Associate Director for Systems at the Digital Scholarship Group. He holds a BS in Mathematics and a Ph.D. in Anglo-Saxon Literature, and prior to Northeastern was the Omeka Director of Developer Outreach at the Center for History and New Media at George Mason, with additional experience as a faculty member and project consultant. At DSG he is responsible for leading the development of CERES, the interface on which DAILP will build its language learning tools, and he brings extensive expertise in open-source software development, user interface, and experience design. For DAILP, he will lead enhancements to CERES to support language learning and will contribute to interface work on transcription and translation tools.

**John Ross** is a Translator Specialist with the Cherokee Nation Language Program. He is a fullblood Cherokee and is bi-literate in the Cherokee language, as well as a Certified Cherokee Language Instructor. In 2014 he was named a National Treasure in the Cherokee Language by the Cherokee Nation. As a member of the DAILP Advisory Board and also as a member of our team of language experts, he will bring an invaluable depth of knowledge and teaching expertise to the project’s training activities and overall design.

**Taylor Snead** is a fifth-year student at Northeastern University studying Computer Science and Linguistics. They have extensive experience in engineering open-source software through building mobile apps, websites, and data processing systems with artists and companies. They started working with DAILP in Spring 2020, analyzing and annotating Cherokee manuscripts. Beyond that, they are architecting the user experience and data infrastructure for the DAILP prototype. They are especially interested in how to integrate a social and local understanding of cultural practices into language description. After graduating, they intend to pursue a graduate degree in Linguistic Anthropology to research language change and digital language practices.

**Naomi Trevino** is a third-year linguistics student at Northeastern University and has been with DAILP for one year annotating manuscripts, compiling data from descriptive resources, and designing and developing technology. She is interested in interdisciplinary approaches to sociolinguistics, phonetics, decolonial theory, and queer/trans theory. She hopes to pursue a Ph.D. program in sociolinguistics to investigate how marginalized languages are used and how they can be leveled with dominant forms of languages.

**Hiroto Uchihara** is Assistant Research Professor in the Instituto de Investigaciones Filologicas at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. He holds a Ph.D. in linguistics from the University at Buffalo, State University of New York. His research focuses primarily on the phonology and morphology of various Native American languages, particularly Cherokee and Zapotec, from both a synchronic and diachronic perspective. His book, Tone and Accent in Oklahoma Cherokee, is a crucial resource for DAILP, and he has also contributed importantly to DAILP lexical data. As a member of the DAILP Advisory Board, his expertise with Cherokee linguistics will be essential in ensuring the quality of the project’s linguistic data and approaches.

## Previous Board Members

**Joel Dunham** is a software developer at Artefactual Systems, Inc. who works on linguistic data management software and digital preservation software. He also works at Concordia University where he builds and maintains the Online Linguistic Database (OLD), an open-source software application that facilitates the collaborative management, analysis, and sharing of linguistic data. He holds a Ph.D. in Linguistics from the University of British Columbia with a focus on under-studied and endangered languages.

**Brad Montgomery-Anderson** is an Assistant Professor of English at Colorado Mesa University in Colorado. He holds a Ph.D. in Linguistics from the University of Kansas. His research focuses on Cherokee language, Mayan languages, and language revitalization, and his recent book, the Cherokee Reference Grammar, won the Leonard Bloomfield Book Award for 2017.
