# Why DAILP? Why Now?

As with most indigenous languages, the vitality of Cherokee has never been more precarious. Learners of Cherokee find too few places of purposeful language use in common life, those places where people from all walks can come together to practice speaking, listening, reading, and writing in Cherokee for reasons important to them. While there are many important and noteworthy innovations in digital means for learning indigenous languages, including online dictionaries, apps, classes, videos, and podcasts, these demonstrate but do not fully realize the potential of digital tools to address the problems of critical mass and embedded, intergenerational language usage in supporting language perseverance. This is particularly the case when it comes to providing meaningful reasons to practice with endangered languages in sites developed specifically to advance knowledge of and practice with these languages.

The Digital Archive for American Indian Languages Preservation and Perseverance (DAILP) seeks to support and extend these efforts, focusing on both language perseverance and language preservation. This project makes the dissemination and contextualization of historical documents part of a vital work of language perseverance, performed centrally by and for those with the most at stake. Through detailed, commented translations and linguistic resources, this project will make these documents richly intelligible and accessible for language learning, scholarship, and public history.
